feat: Biome v1.9.0 (#1078)
biomejs/website: src/content/blog/biome-v1-9.md

---

> title: Biome v1.9 Anniversary release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Biome v1.9 Anniversary Release
```

description: First year of Biome and release of Biome 1.9 that brings CSS formatting and linting by default, a new search command
summary: |
  TODO
authors:
  - conaclos
  - team
pubDate: 2024-09-12
coverImage:
  lightSrc: "@/assets/blog/roadmap-2024/banner-light.png"
  darkSrc: "@/assets/blog/roadmap-2024/banner-dark.png"
  alt: The brand of the project. It says "Biome, toolchain of the web"
socialImage: "@/assets/social-logo.png"
---

Today we’re excited to announce the release of Biome v1.9 and to celebrate the first anniversary of Biome 🎊

> Let's take a look back at the first year of Biome and then look at the new features in Biome 1.9.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's take a look back at the first year of Biome and then explore the new features in Biome 1.9.
```

Winning the challenge brought Biome to light.
People have shown a lot of interest and Biome has been quickly adopted by many projects, including big ones such as [Ant Design](https://ant.design/), [Astro](https://astro.build/), [Sentry](https://sentry.io/), [daisyUI](https://daisyui.com/), [Refine](https://refine.dev/), [Discord](https://discord.com/), [Pulumi](https://www.pulumi.com/), [Label Studio](https://labelstud.io/), [Spicetify](https://spicetify.app/), [Apify](https://apify.com/), [Slint](https://slint.dev/), [Rspack](https://rspack.dev/), [FluidFrameowrk](https://fluidframework.com/), [and others](https://sourcegraph.com/search?q=file:biome.json&patternType=literal&sm=0).

We surpassed 2.7 million monthly NPM downloads in August 2024.

![Biome monthly NPM downloads](../../assets/blog/biome-v1-9/biome-monthly-npm-downloads.svg)

We also gained sponsorship, notably [Shiguredo](https://shiguredo.jp/), [l2BEAT](https://l2beat.com/), [Phoenix Labs](https://www.phoenixlabs.dev/), [KANAME](https://kanamekey.com/), [Nanabit](https://nanabit.dev/), [Vital](https://vital.io/), [CodeRabbit](https://coderabbit.ai/), and [Forge42](https://forge42.dev/).

> These sponsorships are vitals to the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These sponsorships are vital to the project.
```

We also gained many new contributors.
We started with a team of 5 core contributors, and we are now a team of 8 core contributors and 10 maintainers.

In June 2024, Biome won the [JSNation's productivity booster Open Source Award](https://x.com/thejsnation/status/1805561129915060248).

## Biome v1.9

As we celebrate Biome's first year, we're pleased to announce the release of Biome 1.9, which brings many new features and bug fixes.

### Stable CSS formatter and linter

We are thrilled to announce that Biome's CSS formatter and linter are now considered stable and are enabled by default.
Biome only parses **standard CSS syntax**.
It is not able to parse CSS dialects such as SCSS.
Note that you may still encounter some rough edges.
Please report any problems you encounter!

> The CSS linter provides 15 stable lint rules that was ported from [styelint](https://stylelint.io/):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CSS linter provides 15 stable lint rules that were ported from [styelint](https://stylelint.io/):
```

    "formatter": {
      "enabled": false
    },
    "linter": {
      "enabled": false
    }
  }
}
```

or on the command line:

```shell
biome format --css-formatter-enabled=false
biome lint --css-linter-enabled=false
biome check --css-formatter-enabled=false --css-linter-enabled=false
```

### Stable GraphQL formatter and linter

Biome now formats and lints GraphQL files by default.

For now, Biome provides two nursery rules:

- [nursery/noDuplicateFields](https://biomejs.dev/linter/rules/no-duplicate-fields/)
- [nursery/useDeprecatedReason](https://biomejs.dev/linter/rules/use-deprecated-reason/)

If you don't want Biome to format and lint your GraphQL files,
you can disable the GraphQL formatter and linter in the Biome configuration file:

```json
{
  "graphql": {
    "formatter": {
      "enabled": false
    },
    "linter": {
      "enabled": false
    }
  }
}
```

or on the command line:

```shell
biome format --graphql-formatter-enabled=false
biome lint --graphql-linter-enabled=false
biome check --graphql-formatter-enabled=false --css-linter-enabled=false
```

### Search command

The `biome search` command allows you to search in your project using GritQL syntax.

> [GritQL](https://docs.grit.io/language/overview) is a powerful language that lets you do structural searches on your codebase.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[GritQL](https://docs.grit.io/language/overview) is a powerful query language that lets you do structural searches on your codebase.
```

> This means that trivia such as whitespace or even the type of strings quotes used will be ignored in your search query.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This means that trivia such as whitespace or even the type of string quotes used will be ignored in your search query.
```

It also has many features for querying the structure of your code, making it much more elegant for searching code than regular expressions.

While we believe this command may already be useful to users in some situations (especially when integrated in the IDE extensions!), we also had an ulterior motive for adding this command:
We intend to utilize GritQL for our plugin efforts, and by allowing our users to try it out in a first iteration, we hope to gain insight in the type of queries you want to do, as well as the bugs we need to focus on.

> For now, the search command is explicitly marked as **EXPERIMENTAL**, since many limitations remain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For now, the search command is explicitly marked as **EXPERIMENTAL**, since many limitations are yet to be fixed or explored.
```

Reviewer 3: A couple of suggestions:
- we could add an image/html of the diagnostics emitted by the command. Some visual aids can certainly help showing how the search works 
- we could add a special shout out to the contributor that helped us to implement the the search in the CLI

Author: Thanks for the suggestions! The blog post is in an early stage. I thought about adding special mention for contributors that helped in different areas. @arendjr don't hesitate to improve this section. I copied your changelog entry as initial content.

> Keep this in mind when you try it out, and please let us know your issues and your opinion!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Keep this in mind when you try it out, and please let us know what you think!
```

[GritQL](https://docs.grit.io/language/overview) is a powerful query language that lets you do structural searches on your codebase. This means that trivia such as whitespace or even the type of string quotes used will be ignored in your search query. It also has many features for querying the structure of your code, making it much more elegant for searching code than regular expressions.

Integrating a query language such as GritQL is no easy feat, and throughout the year we published [multiple](https://github.com/biomejs/biome/discussions/2286) [status](https://github.com/biomejs/biome/discussions/2585) [updates](https://github.com/biomejs/biome/discussions/3392). Today, we release the first product of this effort: A new `biome search` command.

While we believe this command may already be useful to users in some situations (especially when it gets integrated in our IDE extensions!), this command is really a stepping stone towards our plugin efforts. By allowing our users to try it out in a first iteration, we hope to gain insight into the type of queries you want to do, as well as the bugs we need to focus on.

> For now, the search command is explicitly marked as **EXPERIMENTAL**, since many limitations are yet to be fixed or explored. Keep this in mind when you try it out, and please let us know what you think!

Reviewer 4: I'm thinking it might be good to add one line still:

```suggestion
For an overview of specific limitations, please see: https://github.com/biomejs/biome/issues/2582
```

socialImage: "@/assets/social-logo.png"
---

Today we’re excited to announce the release of Biome v1.9 and to celebrate the first anniversary of Biome 🎊

Let's take a look back at the first year of Biome and then explore the new features in Biome 1.9.

## One year of Biome

We officially [announced Biome](/blog/annoucing-biome/) on 29 August 2023.
From its inception, Biome has been a community-driven project.
We have a governance and a solid base of contributors.

In October 2023, one of the creators of Prettier launched [the Prettier challenge](https://console.algora.io/challenges/prettier) that rewarded any project written in Rust that passes at least 95% of the Prettier tests for JavaScript.
We quickly organized ourselves to get there as soon as possible.
By the end of November, we [surpassed this goal](/blog/biome-wins-prettier-challenge/) by passing 97% of the Prettier tests for JavaScript, as well as TypeScript, JSX and TSX!
In the process, we identified several formatting issues in Prettier.
This has also pushed contributions to Prettier to greatly improve its performance.
This challenge was a win for the whole web ecosystem!

Winning the challenge brought Biome to light.

> People have shown a lot of interest and Biome has been quickly adopted by many projects, including big ones such as [Ant Design](https://ant.design/), [Astro](https://astro.build/), [Sentry](https://sentry.io/), [daisyUI](https://daisyui.com/), [Refine](https://refine.dev/), [Discord](https://discord.com/), [Pulumi](https://www.pulumi.com/), [Label Studio](https://labelstud.io/), [Spicetify](https://spicetify.app/), [Apify](https://apify.com/), [Slint](https://slint.dev/), [Rspack](https://rspack.dev/), [FluidFrameowrk](https://fluidframework.com/), [and others](https://sourcegraph.com/search?q=file:biome.json&patternType=literal&sm=0).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
People have shown a lot of interest and Biome has been quickly adopted by many projects, including big ones such as [Ant Design](https://ant.design/), [Astro](https://astro.build/), [Sentry](https://sentry.io/), [daisyUI](https://daisyui.com/), [Refine](https://refine.dev/), [Discord](https://discord.com/), [Pulumi](https://www.pulumi.com/), [Label Studio](https://labelstud.io/), [Spicetify](https://spicetify.app/), [Apify](https://apify.com/), [Slint](https://slint.dev/), [Rspack](https://rspack.dev/), [FluidFramework](https://fluidframework.com/), [and others](https://sourcegraph.com/search?q=file:biome.json&patternType=literal&sm=0).
```

We surpassed 2.7 million monthly NPM downloads in August 2024.

![Biome monthly NPM downloads](../../assets/blog/biome-v1-9/biome-monthly-npm-downloads.svg)

We also gained sponsorship, notably [Shiguredo](https://shiguredo.jp/), [l2BEAT](https://l2beat.com/), [Phoenix Labs](https://www.phoenixlabs.dev/), [KANAME](https://kanamekey.com/), [Nanabit](https://nanabit.dev/), [Vital](https://vital.io/), [CodeRabbit](https://coderabbit.ai/), and [Forge42](https://forge42.dev/).
These sponsorships are vital to the project.

We also gained many new contributors.
We started with a team of 5 core contributors, and we are now a team of 8 core contributors and 10 maintainers.

> In June 2024, Biome won the [JSNation's productivity booster Open Source Award](https://x.com/thejsnation/status/1805561129915060248).

Reviewer 4: Really love this section full of highlights! Great way to reflect on our achievements :heart:

Author: I still expect some improvement. However, I think it is a good start :)

## Biome v1.9

As we celebrate Biome's first year, we're pleased to announce the release of Biome 1.9, which brings many new features and bug fixes.

### Stable CSS formatter and linter

We are thrilled to announce that Biome's CSS formatter and linter are now considered stable and are enabled by default.

> Biome only parses **standard CSS syntax**.
> It is not able to parse CSS dialects such as SCSS.
> Note that you may still encounter some rough edges.
> Please report any problems you encounter!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Do note that Biome only parses **standard CSS syntax** so far, and doesn't yet handle CSS dialects such as SCSS. Since this is brand new functionality, you may also still run into some rough edges. Please report any problems you encounter!
```

> The CSS linter provides 15 stable lint rules that were ported from [styelint](https://stylelint.io/):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The CSS linter provides 15 stable lint rules that were ported from [stylelint](https://stylelint.io/):
```

- [suspicious/noDuplicateFontNames](https://biomejs.dev/linter/rules/no-duplicate-font-names/)
- [suspicious/noDuplicateSelectorsKeyframeBlock](https://biomejs.dev/linter/rules/no-duplicate-selectors-keyframe-block/)
- [suspicious/noEmptyBlock](https://biomejs.dev/linter/rules/no-empty-block/)
- [suspicious/noImportantInKeyframe](https://biomejs.dev/linter/rules/no-important-in-keyframe/)
- [suspicious/noShorthandPropertyOverrides](https://biomejs.dev/linter/rules/no-shorthand-property-overrides/)

If you don't want Biome to format and lint your CSS files,
you can disable the CSS formatter and linter in the Biome configuration file:

```json
{
  "css": {
    "formatter": {
      "enabled": false
    },
    "linter": {
      "enabled": false
    }
  }
}
```

or on the command line:

```shell
biome format --css-formatter-enabled=false
biome lint --css-linter-enabled=false
biome check --css-formatter-enabled=false --css-linter-enabled=false
```

Special thanks to [Denis Bezrukov @denbezrukov](https://github.com/denbezrukov) and [Jon Egeland @faultyserver](https://github.com/faultyserver) for implementing most of the CSS parser and formatter!

> Special thanks to [Yoshiaki Togami @togami2864](https://github.com/togami2864) for coordinating the implementation and implementing most of the CSS lint rules!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Special thanks to [Yoshiaki Togami @togami2864](https://github.com/togami2864) for coordinating the implementation and for implementing most of the CSS lint rules!
```

### Stable GraphQL formatter and linter

> Biome now formats and lints GraphQL files by default.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Another brand new feature: Biome now formats and lints GraphQL files by default.
```

For now, Biome provides two nursery rules:

- [nursery/noDuplicateFields](https://biomejs.dev/linter/rules/no-duplicate-fields/)
- [nursery/useDeprecatedReason](https://biomejs.dev/linter/rules/use-deprecated-reason/)

If you don't want Biome to format and lint your GraphQL files,
you can disable the GraphQL formatter and linter in the Biome configuration file:

```json
{
  "graphql": {
    "formatter": {
      "enabled": false
    },
    "linter": {
      "enabled": false
    }
  }
}
```

or on the command line:

```shell
biome format --graphql-formatter-enabled=false
biome lint --graphql-linter-enabled=false
biome check --graphql-formatter-enabled=false --css-linter-enabled=false
```

Special thanks to [Võ Hoàng Long @vohoanglong0107](https://github.com/vohoanglong0107) for implementing most of the features related to GraphQL.

### Search command

> The `biome search` command allows you to search in your project using GritQL syntax.
> 
> [GritQL](https://docs.grit.io/language/overview) is a powerful query language that lets you do structural searches on your codebase.
> This means that trivia such as whitespace or even the type of string quotes used will be ignored in your search query.
> It also has many features for querying the structure of your code, making it much more elegant for searching code than regular expressions.
> 
> While we believe this command may already be useful to users in some situations (especially when integrated in the IDE extensions!), we also had an ulterior motive for adding this command:
> We intend to utilize GritQL for our plugin efforts, and by allowing our users to try it out in a first iteration, we hope to gain insight in the type of queries you want to do, as well as the bugs we need to focus on.
> 
> For now, the search command is explicitly marked as **EXPERIMENTAL**, since many limitations are yet to be fixed or explored.
> Keep this in mind when you try it out, and please let us know what you think!
> 
> Note: GritQL escapes code snippets using backticks, but most shells interpret backticks as command invocations. To avoid this, it's best to put single quotes around your Grit queries.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Back in February, one of our Core Contributors published [a proposal for plugin support](https://github.com/biomejs/biome/discussions/1762). One of the highlights was the use of GritQL as a foundation for our plugin system.

[GritQL](https://docs.grit.io/language/overview) is a powerful query language that lets you do structural searches on your codebase. This means that trivia such as whitespace or even the type of string quotes used will be ignored in your search query. It also has many features for querying the structure of your code, making it much more elegant for searching code than regular expressions.

Integrating a query language such as GritQL is no easy feat, and throughout the year we published [multiple](https://github.com/biomejs/biome/discussions/2286) [status](https://github.com/biomejs/biome/discussions/2585) [updates](https://github.com/biomejs/biome/discussions/3392). Today, we release the first product of this effort: A new `biome search` command.

While we believe this command may already be useful to users in some situations (especially when it gets integrated in our IDE extensions!), this command is really a stepping stone towards our plugin efforts. By allowing our users to try it out in a first iteration, we hope to gain insight into the type of queries you want to do, as well as the bugs we need to focus on.

For now, the search command is explicitly marked as **EXPERIMENTAL**, since many limitations are yet to be fixed or explored. Keep this in mind when you try it out, and please let us know what you think!

Even though there are still plenty of limitations, we do believe the integration has progressed far enough that we can shift our focus towards the integration of actual plugins. We cannot yet promise a timeline, but we'll keep you posted!

PS.: GritQL escapes code snippets using backticks, but most shells interpret backticks as command invocations. To avoid this, it's best to put single quotes around your Grit queries.
```

Reviewer 4: I think this screenshot might be nice to insert:

![biome_search_new](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/30017a80-8b22-481c-bcb4-33b362b33f33)

Might be a nice fit right under the paragraph that ends with "Today, we release the first product of this effort: A new `biome search` command."

Author: @arendjr dummy question: why the middle one is a match? It doesn't contain `manifest`?

Reviewer 4: This one might be a good alternative (I trimmed the results a bit for brevity, if you run this on our repo it will actually give some more results, but at least they're all correct):

```shell
$ biome search '`console.$method($args)` where { $method <: or { `info`, `warn` } }'
/home/arendjr/Projects/biome/packages/@biomejs/biome/scripts/postinstall.js:49:3 search ━━━━━━━━━━━━

  49 │          console.warn(
  50 │                  `The Biome CLI postinstall script failed to resolve the binary file "${binName}". Running Biome from the npm package will probably not work correctly.`,
  51 │          );

/home/arendjr/Projects/biome/benchmark/bench.js:183:3 search ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

  183 │                 console.info(
  184 │                         `Adding directories ${dirs.join()} to sparse checkout in ${projectDirectory}`,
  185 │                 );

/home/arendjr/Projects/biome/benchmark/bench.js:193:2 search ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

  193 │         console.info("Building Biome...");

Searched 24 files in 131ms. Found 3 matches.
```

For instance, the following command search for all `console.log` invocations:

```shell
biome search '`console.log($message)`'
```

> Special thanks to [Arend van Beelen @arendjr](https://github.com/arendjr) for implementing this feature all by himself!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Special thanks to [Grit](https://grit.io) for open-sourcing GritQL, [Arend van Beelen @arendjr](https://github.com/arendjr) for integrating the GritQL engine into Biome, and to [@BackupMiles] for implementing the formatting of search results in the `biome search` command!
```

### `.editorconfig` support

Biome is now able to take the [`.editorconfig`](https://editorconfig.org/) of your project into account.
This is an opt-in feature. You have to turn it on in your Biome configuration file:

```json title="biome.json"
{
  "formatter": {
    "useEditorconfig": true
  }
}
```

> Note that all options specified in the Biome configuration file overrides the ones specified in `.editorconfig`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note that all options specified in the Biome configuration file override the ones specified in `.editorconfig`.
```

We cannot yet promise a timeline, but we'll keep you posted!

PS.: GritQL escapes code snippets using backticks, but most shells interpret backticks as command invocations.
To avoid this, it's best to put single quotes around your Grit queries.
For instance, the following command search for all `console.log` invocations:

```shell
biome search '`console.log($message)` where { $message <: contains "manifest" }' ./packages
```

<pre class="language-text"><code class="language-text">./packages/@biomejs/biome/scripts/generate-packages.mjs:50:2 search ━━━

  <strong>50 │ 	<span style="color: #3aa0d7;">console.log(`Update manifest ${manifestPath}`);</span></strong>

./packages/@biomejs/biome/scripts/generate-packages.mjs:68:2 search ━━━

  <strong>68 │ 	<span style="color: #3aa0d7;">console.log(`Copy binary ${binaryTarget}`);</span></strong>

./packages/@biomejs/biome/scripts/generate-packages.mjs:84:2 search ━━━

  <strong>84 │ 	<span style="color: #3aa0d7;">console.log(`Update manifest ${manifestPath}`);</span></strong>

> <span style="color: #3aa0d7;">Searched 21 files in 15ms. Found 1 matches.</span>

Reviewer 4: The incorrect result count was a bug I fixed this week :)

```suggestion
<span style="color: #3aa0d7;">Searched 21 files in 15ms. Found 3 matches.</span>
```
